good printing and typographic tape.
But better things were at hand.
I went home that Christmas and asked my father for a printing press.
He went to see Walter Lewis, who was the university printer, and Lewis said, well, that's quite a coincidence, because Michael Hornby has just asked me if I can find a good home for his father's press.
Now, Michael Hornby was the son of St.
John Hornby, the founder of the famous Ashending Press.
And it was, in fact, even more of a coincidence than Lewis thought, because Michael Hornby had been one of my father's pupils at New College in the 20s.
And so before long, I was delighted at pulling the bar of an old 1853 Hopkinson & Cope Royal Albion, one of the very, very best hand presses I've ever set hands on.
Now I've got help as a Southern Methodist.
The Cambridge University Press provided type and advice
And slowly the quality of my work improved, and by the time I got to Oxford as a student I became quite ambitious.
The Duke of Wellington, the then Duke of Wellington, gave me an unpublished contemporary memoir of his great ancestor to print, and it was, by my standards, a runaway bestseller.
I printed and sold a thousand copies, and several of the papers that reviewed it were quite complimentary about its appearance.
The last book I printed was Francis Cornford's last book of poems, 96 pages long, with illustrations in seven colours and an edition of 1,500 copies.
It took two years, and it was actually a bit of a fiasco, because the ordinary edition, which cost 15 shillings, settled out very quickly.
But the limited edition, which was to have been signed by the author, fell through.
She died seven weeks before I printed the last sheet.
It's been an awful lesson to you.
If you're going to have a signed limited edition, print the last sheet first.
Still, all this work brought me in touch with Geoffrey Keynes, who is her cousin by marriage, and I owe to him and Tim Munby, the genial and generous librarian of King's College, Cambridge, my introduction to a wider circle afflicted with the same passion for books that I had.
Well, I'm sorry about this long digression, but it brings me to the founding fathers of the book collector.
John Hayward was and remained the most powerful.
Although a cripple, multiple sclerosis had begun to set in when he was a brilliant undergraduate editor of the works of Rochester.
Now confined to a wheelchair, he conducted business from a desk in a bay window overlooking the Thames on Cheney Road.
Until recently, he had shared a flat with T.S.
Eliot, whose muse and critic he had been during the writing of some of his best poetry.
You actually want to know one of the most gripping accounts of this association.
Read Helen Gardner's fascinating and very sympathetic appreciation in her study of the four quartets, a very moving account of creative process, not to mention John Hayward.
This association came to a very abrupt end with Eliot's second marriage.
To be absolutely exact, Eliot sneaked out before breakfast, leaving a note saying, I've moved out.
And there was a new age as a result to John's always mordant command of those who came to him.
Everyone did come to him.
Printers came to have their proofs excoriated.
Poets abided his merciless tongue for the quality of the creative criticism that he provided.
Librarians and book collectors came to listen to his fascinating and malicious gossip.
No one could leave him without quailing at the thought of what John would say about them now behind their backs.
None failed to come back for fear of what he would say if they did not.
None of this gives any suggestion of the magnetism and charm of this extraordinary man who turned all his weakness into strength, his once handsome face, now a gargoyle, his legs immobile, only one arm moving, but that capable still of writing a beautiful hand.
He dominated the early years of the book collector, although two others, more able-bodied than John, were nominally editors, one of the other,
It was, in fact, John who took all the decisions, chose the articles, and rewrote and criticised till the hapless authors gave in from sheer exhaustion.
He, whose magisterial comments on sales and exhibitions, institutional acquisitions and catalogues, gave the magazine a new and powerful authority in the world of old and rare books and manuscripts.
At the same time, the editorial board was very much a team.
Percy Muir was the oldest of the group.
His education had stopped when he left school, after which he'd been a clerk, an actor, and a soldier.
only taking up bookselling by chance when he was demobilised in 1919.
How he became a partner and eventually owner of Elkin Matthews, that great name of the 90s, and then in the 20s and 30s, the most adventurous and scholarly of antiquarian booksellers, is a tale once told in the pages of the book collector and subsequently brought together in his autobiography, Minding My Own Business, which again is full of worthwhile lessons for our own time.
By sheer application, he'd educated himself till he'd become a tower of strength, not only among English, but also the European book trade.
Literature in all languages, fine printing, theatre and music, early industry and trade found him well equipped.
And his tall figure, beautiful speaking voice, and peculiar hand-woven bow ties made him a striking figure.
Almost unique among the English and American book trade at the time, apart from the expatriate part of it, he could speak French and German fluently.
But perhaps his principal contribution to the book collector was not the admirable and copious articles and notes he provided up to a month or two before his lamented death ten years ago, but his friendship with Ian Fleming.
Now, Ian Fleming's name will be very familiar to you as the author of the James Bond novels, whose spectacular popular success and exploitation has overlain the real quality of his early writing, notably Casino Royale.
What you may not know is that Fleming was, and had been since just before the war, a book collector of very great determination and staggering originality.
His subject matter was the books that demonstrated the progress of the human mind since 1800.
Nobody else was in the field.
The books were not then expensive, not even the origin of species, but they were hard to find.
Fleming, working hard in naval intelligence during the war, and as foreign editor of Lord Kemsley's Sunday Times after the war, didn't have time to look for them himself and made Percy Muir his agent.
This was ideal for Percy too, because the war had forced him to abandon London, had been bombed out.
And choosing the subjects and the books while the way in many bleak hours during the war and after it, the more abstruse foreign items like Semmelweisle d'Etiologie, this is one of the rarest books in the world, the little pamphlet tracked on outbreak of purple fever in the 1860s in Vienna, which almost accidentally laid the entire foundations for the creation of immunology.
Of all examples of how the printed word can transform human life is one of the most staggering.
Anyway, picking up books like this were a splendid excuse to renew pre-war friendships in Italy and Germany for Percy, where he had a tremendous influence in hatching over the wounds of war.
Fleming was ideally placed, as you can see, to rescue the book collector from its 1952
And in that year, Lord Kemsley gave up books as suddenly as he'd taken them up.
And the Brockmore Press was closed down, and the book collector would have followed.
Sorry, it's 1953-4, the winter of 54.
The Brockmore Press was closed down, and the book collector would have followed, and Fleming rescued it.
He'd just begun to reap the rewards of the success of Casino Royale, and felt he could offer to buy the book collector from Lord Kemsley for £100, which he did.
So it was a very anxious moment for the editorial board, which is now solely responsible for the journal's future, and they decided to protect it by asking one or two book-loving friends to act as guarantors by putting up some capital which would provide the reserves needed in an emergency.
Several people responded, notably Mr. Paul Mellon, with great generosity, and the book collector was off again with, as I said, no visible change in editorial policy or physical appearance, except that it now had a new printer in James Shand of the Shenville Press.
a firm distinguished for the quality of its printing.
I suppose it was about now that I became a regular reader, and as I turned the pages now, I can still recapture the excitement that I felt when I first saw them.
There was that marvellous series, Nixon's English Bookbindings, which has become now enshrined in a book and continued by his successor, Miriam Foote.
There was my last, now recently dead, friend Julian Brown's English Literary Autographs.
There was unfamiliar libraries.
from Manchester to Los Angeles, from Kershaw in the west of Ireland, to Arevan in southern Soviet Georgia.
Contemporary collectors described the libraries of most of the great collectors of the time, Robert Taylor, Bradley Martin, Albert Ehrman, Major Abbey.
Well, a portrait of a bibliophile has ranged from Humphrey-Dougard Gloucester in the 15th century to Charles Spoilbosch de Gloucester, the collector of his great French contemporaries in the 19th century.
And above all, there was uncollected authors in a series of invaluable author bibliographies, beginning with John Hayward's article, assisted by his old friend, the subject of the piece, on Raymond Chandler.
And most of all, there was John's authoritative commentary, a feature that still continues, though in a slightly different form.
It's now called news and comment, and it's rather longer.
Well, what about the sort of feature articles in the Book Collector?
Well, they all seem to me to deal with new and unfamiliar subjects.
The first article on beta radiography ever appeared in the Book Collector.
Graham Pollard's brilliant resurrection of Anglo-Saxon bookbindings by X-ray photography first appeared here.
Here, too, the strange conduct of the Cathedral Library of Saragossa was first exposed.
I noticed, incidentally, that Larry Wittenhouse
I haven't read it yet, The Definitive Account of the Vinland Math in the current Yale Library Gazette.
And I gather that he thinks he got Ferraioli out of prison when I expect he helped.
But it was an article in the Book Collector, which was subsequently appeared in the Sunday Times, that caused the Spanish ambassador to be summoned to the Foreign Office and told him to get him out of the jug quickly.
One article that peculiarly fascinates me was by a lady whom I've since lost touch with called Mary Walter at UCLA, who pieced together the astonishing story of this suppressed crypto-antisemitic version of Thomas Mann's Valsam and Blue, which was resurrected from waste sheets of the suppressed issue of the magazine in which it had appeared, which had been providently preserved for packing by the bookseller publisher.
How much bibliography owes to the parsimonious habits of booksellers?
Well, there's been other articles.
Robert Bosper wrote a marvellous article on the red brick universities in England.
There's been an article on the library of the church at Monterey.
Harding's unique collection of song books, once in Chicago and now at the Bodleian Library, Oxford.
On dirty books in England from 1660 to 1745, we did the first
full-length description of the damage caused by the flood in Florence in 1967, and so on and so on.
Well, I suppose it was natural once I got into business and work in London that I got involved into this vortex.
The immediate cause was Stanley Morrison, the older and much admired friend of Carter Muir and Hayward, who invited me in 1959 to be his research assistant, thereby setting me off on a course which led finally to writing his biography, finishing his last great work called Politics and Script.
I find myself doing odd reviews for the book collector, but what first caught John Hayward's attention was an article I wrote called The Aesthetic Investor's Guide to Current Literary Value, in which I attempted to prove that every author had a value, mathematical or financial, it didn't really matter which, that could be worked out by correlating the original price of his works, the current price, the number of copies printed, and the number of copies now surviving,
multiplied by the number of lines accorded to the author in the Cambridge History of English Literature.
John Maywood liked it.
It sent up both the book trade and academic lit crit with impartial abandon.
I read it again the other day.
I still think it's quite too funny.
Anyway, I soon became admitted to the terrors and delights of tea at Carlisle Mansions.
John's conversation was ribald, erudite, and riveting.
I learned much and began to be less afraid.
I even took our eldest child, now doing her PhD at the Courthold, she was then about eight months old, and crawling.
John fed her very sticky chocolate cake and watched with cheerful malice in the hope that she would spread it on the T.S.
Eliot manuscripts on a convenient bottom shelf.
What I did not realise...
in those days was that John, immobile, had begun to become dependent on me.
People used to say that he kept alive on willpower alone with his terrible disabilities.
He felt that it was the activity of the mind.
The endless curiosity about other people that forced his reluctant limbs to the little activity they could compass.
He lived vicariously through the activity of others.
In 1965, I remember, we'd had no holiday for a variety of reasons until October when we were about to snatch a bare week starting on a Friday.
That day, John rang me up with some question about a review, which I couldn't follow.
He had, by then, no muscular control of his mouth, and this was apt to prolong his very, very long telephone calls still further.
In the end, I gave up, and I said, John, I'm off on holiday today.
I've got nothing else to do.
I'll come down and see you.
So I went down to Chelsea, and we sorted out the problem.
I still didn't quite see what the fuss was about.
And as I was going to meet, he said, you will make sure everything is all right, won't you?
I said, John, look, I'm going off on holiday.
You'll be here.
You can look after it.
Yes, he said, but I want to be sure that you will if anything goes wrong.
I was very puzzled by this and said, of course I will.
Off I went on holiday, and that night he died.
Three weeks later, I was at his memorial service in St Luke's Church, Chelsea, and a posse of hard-faced men, Muir, Carter, and Mumby, rounded me up after it.
As I stood against the wall of the North Isle of church, I looked at them with their hats well pulled down, their hands in their overcoat pockets, and I realised that my hour had come.
And with John's last words still echoing in my ears, I agreed to do my best to take his place.
Well, 16 years later, no, God, 25 years later, we're still here.
I still wonder at it.
I was instantly plunged into a major financial crisis.
Ian Fleming had died a few weeks before John.
And the cumulative effect of inheritance tax on Fleming's estate, followed by inheritance tax on John's estate, swallowed up every single penny of the book collector's reserves.
And we survived that, and we survived the death three years later of our printer, James Shandt.
But the greatest of all losses came on the 29th of March 1976, with the death of the kindest and closest of friends to the book collector and its editor, John Carter.
Jake, as many knew him, was as distinguished in person as he was in mind.
A scholar of King's College, Cambridge, he was for many years manager of Scriblin's rare book department, and as such made a host of friends in this country, and with his Savannah-born wife, Ernestine, made more as an attaché at the British Embassy in Washington.
and later at Sotheby's.
I dare say that some of you were as proud as I am to number him among their friends.
He only made one enemy, Thomas James Wise, whose forgeries he exploded in the famous Enquiring to the Nature of Seven 19th century pamphlets, which was printed and published in 1934, and which was republished 50 years later and edited by me with an extra volume, which I'm very proud to have
added to his memory.
As an editor, he also co-opted me onto that great catalogue of all the world's greatest books, Printing in the Mind of Man.
I sometimes think, as people mainly generally do, that if I had a penny for every pound that the book collector, the book selling trade, made out of Printing in the Mind of Man, I could have retired on the proceeds a long time ago.
But John was actually a great classical scholar, Montay, and his
critical talents in that direction displayed in his edition of Houseman's Priorities.
It's a marvelous book.
He was a writer of very great elegance himself, and the ABC for book collectors is a perennial reminder of his skill.
Actually, I'm real fed up about that because I have a box which I must get down to someday.
It contains 25 books on book collecting written in the last decade.
And I want to do one of those consumer guides.
through guys to book collectors, you know, full of elaborate graphics and graphs and things like that.
Yes, I know.
Well, take it from me that ABC for book collectors is way out in front and the rest is nowhere.
The trouble is, of course, that it was a book that was meant for permanent revision.
And those arch buffoons in Random House, when they took over Knopf, they forgot about this.
And so they've gone on reprinting it unaltered.
thereby souring the entire market for the rest of the world.
And so there hasn't been a revised edition since the one that I did in 1980.
Well, where do we stand now?
We're much where we were 30 years ago.
The Book Collector's got about 2,000 subscribers, just under half of them in this country.
Its contributors are also drawn pretty equally from Britain and the USA and a few from elsewhere.
I like to think of its registered office, so to speak, in Atlantis.
And the leader with which each issue begins, which I usually write myself about some topic or book of current interest, it's firmly aimed at both sides of the Atlantic.
It's always anonymous.
I always sort of taskably assume that everybody knows that anything that doesn't have somebody else's name in it is written by me.
I'm thankful to say that those awful people, the people who make a living by compiling
anthologies called the year's best work in this that and the other have never conned on to this fact so I do not get a series of letters saying will you please assign the copy into our article on so and so which affects other people then come the articles which I've talked to you about then there's news and comment which has all the latest news on books and libraries and exhibitions book sales and catalogues book collectors
booksellers and librarians, the whole world of old and rare books.
It's written by several hands, in fact.
And it's topical, and I hope careful, and sometimes funny, and only scandalous if I know that the scandal is true.
After that, there's bibliographical notes and queries, an invaluable agony column for those who've got some small but important discovery they want to get off their chest, or want to run down some missing manuscript or edition, or have found some other bibliographical conundrum.
I wish that more people took advantage of this, actually.
It used to be much longer, and for some reason I can't explain.
It seems to me that it still serves the same useful purpose.
It's a marvellous way of running down the manuscript that was last seen in the Lothian sale in 1937, and where is it now?
And people don't use it, so if any of you have got some little problem that you think somebody else in the world, jot it down on a piece of paper, send it into the book collector, and we'll publish it.
After that come the book reviews, which are occasionally dull, though I try to stop that.
They're usually authoritative, and sometimes, again, they're very funny.
That makes up the text.
But there's one other very important component, the advertisements.
We take great personal pride in these.
We see to the design and presentation and try and see that they're all equally elegant.
Every now and again, somebody sends us what they call a mechanical.
which usually lives up to its name, but so long as we can do the setting ourselves, they really look rather nice.
And I like to think of this as a kind of directory of all the best booksellers in Britain, the USA, and Europe.
There have been, it's rather sad that the old friends, so many of them, Mike Papantonio, John Fleming, Krauss, LDF, Peter Murray Hill, the people who set us off in life, have died, and some of their
I can't call them equals.
I've been a little slow to pick up what I see as beauty.
I was thinking of Cavallity.
Yes, Cavallity.
Cavallity is our motto too, friend.
I think they get a very good return for it.
I will tell you, there was one bookseller in New York who once said that he thought he'd better cancel his full page advertisement.
I said, well, let's still think it over because he really is very sorry to lose you.
Ten days later he rang up and he said, could you still put my ad back in again?
I said, well, yes, it hasn't got the press yet.
He said, well, I wish you would.
He said, somebody came into the shop just after I wrote that letter and asked for, said he'd read a copy of the book collection and could he have my last catalogue?
And I said, I gave him one and didn't expect to see him or hear any more about it.
Ten days later he came back and bought a $35,000 book out of the catalogue.
Advertising pay!
In the old days, of course, we were still printed by letterpress.
And I told you I'd say something about the covers.
And in those days, the covers were all printed on different colored paper stock, each with a very elegant border of colored printers' flowers surrounding the contents.
And this design was, I'm ashamed to say, plagiarized by so many American bibliographical library journals.
that I decided with much regret to give it up.
And we now use a series of different early title page borders, again with, I think, distinctive and cheerful colours, which we've tried to maintain ever since.
Well, here we are in 1989.
I shall have celebrated my Silver Jubilee next year if I live so long.
Book collectors now have become a closely studied species.
rarely found outside wildlife parks like book fairs or reservations like libraries.
But somehow they survive.
And indeed, they're showing a new vitality these days which suggests that all the rules of ecology are being somehow contravened.
On the whole, the book collector still survives.
A new generation of subscribers and contributors is beginning to enjoy it, I think, and I think to share in
a distinctive and even admirable tradition, one that brings individuals and institutions, collectors, booksellers and librarians a bit closer together.
That's what he's really there for, you know.
There's no other journal that actually tries to serve all those communities.
There's trade journals, there's library journals, there's scholarly journals, but we're the only one that tries to sit and see it through all those points of view.
And I can't see myself, really, as any more than a link in a chain, which I hope will go on for a long, long time after I have seen it.
Thank you very much for listening to me.
Any brickbats, comments, and queries will be filled as best I can with my mouthful.
What became of Ian Fleming's collection?
The Lilly Library.
What was the answer?
It's gone to the Lilly Library in IU.
That must be a good story.
That wouldn't be one of the invitations for it.
Oh no, I couldn't say such a thing.
Well, you touched on a little question which I approach with a certain delicacy.
There is, in Iowa City, a thing called, I think, the U.S.
Military Hospital.
medical library.
Why you should need to subscribe to the book collector, I simply can't imagine.
Well, no, I think part of it would defeat a casual external inspection, shall we say.
There are other great libraries which don't subscribe, but I do notice that the librarian, I happen to know by name, subscribes to it.
The main fact of the matter is that, you know,
Do you have a differential rate for an institution?
We do not, no.
No, we get the same subscription for everybody.
And actually, it's dirt cheap.
I keep on being, how much is it?
Yearly subscription rates, 28.
Well, I suppose that's $28.
That's where I'm allowing them.
Oh, no, that's a different thing.
That's called Libraries and Culture.
I'm sorry, that's not... How much is In Corsica?
Oh, well, In Corsica, you have to belong to society, I don't know.
We have $40 a year, and I reckon that probably that's for our... You get 500 pages for $40.
You couldn't do that with most books.
No, the fact of the matter is that...
In terms of actually what it says, name institutions of three-eighths, and names of five-eighths.
But I know that some of the individuals are really libraries in disguise, and I know darn well that the number of libraries are really mortgaged.
Well, I'm counting booksellers as individuals for the purpose of this.
Of course, some booksellers have multiple subscriptions from which I know that there are other people whom I don't know about who will habitually buy their copy from forages or not.
We did an analysis of, since many of our members would get our proceedings for free, and we were wondering what in fact they were getting their copies.
We did an analysis last year and matching their
very little um uh evidence to make that necessarily that is including there are a few um institutions where they were not uh
I mean, the people who actually are like Shaw in my really good books are the not inconsiderable number of big libraries who have two subscriptions, one to go on the shelf and one to circulate the staff.
And that always flatters and pleases me very much indeed.
Nicholas, I didn't get the name of the founder of the, what was it, the book, the handbook?
Reginald Horrocks.
Horrocks.
H-O-R-R-O-X.
Oh, okay.
What was his background?
Well, I don't know.
I suppose.
I mean, he only died within the last decade, actually.
I mean,
I think he would have just started as a bookseller before the war.
What he did in the war I don't know, but he started up the book handbook in the immediate aftermath of the war.
And then he dropped it in certain places I really don't know, and went off and was a bookseller in Bath, and for years and years she was one of those
curiating booksellers who used to issue catalogs sporadically with at least three really good books, very cheap, and no telephone number.
John Hayward.
This will show you the advantages of immobility.